yume is a menu system with user-editable, mouse-activated shell
commands.  It creates and runs a menu based on user-provided
arguments. The current version, yume3, is Gtk-based, while a previous
version (yume2) is based on the xforms library for X Window System,
and an original version (vintage 1997) is Tcl/TK based.

To make yume, see directions in INSTALL.  That file explains how to
unpack the source files, and how to make yume.  Note, as of January
2018, the latest yume release is in a git repository on github.

The yume3 wiki at <https://github.com/ghjwp7/yume3/wiki> has a "yume
screen shot examples" page, with links to images, code, and notes
working ok (but local links not working, due to markdown missing
anchors).  The wiki also has two versions (at the moment) of the yume
man page.  [Neither version is formatted as well as a groff-output man
page, as generated during yume installation.]  A better-formatted man
page will be put up when available.

An example of use:  The input

      yume -bu date ls -ex &

creates a menu window with three buttons, labeled date, ls, exit.
Clicking the button labeled date runs the date command and displays
the result in the window where yume started; clicking the ls button
runs the ls command; clicking exit closes the menu window.


As another example:  The input

      yume -do 'ls -al' 'cal -3' &

makes a menu window with two "do" items, with command text in an
editing box where you can change it, and with the option to turn
on "roll-over" operation, where an item is executed when the mouse
cursor crosses it.

For more examples, cd to the yume3/examples directory after you make
yume, and enter the command ./yume-examples.  Also, see man yume and
man yume-examples.  The /web subdirectory includes HTML and pdf
versions of screen-shots of most yume-examples scripts.

- jiw, January 2018

Bug notes:
1. As of 18 Jan 2018, any examples that use exported shell functions
won't run correctly if default shell dash is v. 0.5.8 or later, as it
is for Ubuntu 15 and later.  A branch to fix this issue is underway.

2. Misleadingly, the INSTALL doc refers to files at sourceforge

