.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" yume.1 -- by James Waldby -- 21-22 Feb 2009
.\" $Id: yume.1,v 1.7 2018/01/22 j-waldby $
.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii yume.1
.ds PRS \fB\-at\fP, \fB\-bd\fP, \fB\-bw\fP, \fB\-de\fP, \fB\-in\fP, \fB\-iv\fP, \fB\-la\fP, or \fB\-ti\fP
.TH yume 1 "$Date: 2018/11/11; 2025 $" Linux "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
.ad l
yume \- Easy and flexible menu system that lets you encapsulate shell
commands for few-click or no-click mouse-over operation

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B yume  [ [\fIcommands\fP] [\-bu] [\-do] [\-dl] [\-ex] [\-at\ \fIgeometry\fP]
.B [\-in\ \fIfile\fP] [\-iv\ \fIvalue\fP] [\-la\ \fIlabel\fP]
.B [\-ti\ \fItitle\fP] [\-de\ \fIvalpair\fP] [\-bd\ \fIbuttondata\fP]
.B [\-bw \fIwidthcodes\fP] [\-Y[a|d|e|i|l|n|o|t|u|v|w|x]] [\-Y<d>] ]*

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B yume
creates and runs a menu based on the arguments it is given.  The
appearance of a menu may be changed by changing the order of arguments
to
.B yume.
Description of
.B yume
is continued below, after a synoptic overview.  Note, yume3 uses the
Gtk+ graphics API, while yume2 uses xforms.  Note, each \fByume\fP
option is specified by a separate three-character word like \fB\-bu\fP
or \fB\-do\fP.

.SH SYNOPSIS, continued

This section gives an overview of option sequences, in a form less
terse than above.  For further details and examples, please see the
OPTIONS section below.  Options for Gtk-based yume3 are described
here.  For the older (and no longer developed) xforms-based yume2, see
documents distributed with yume2 source.

.IP "\fB\-at\fP geometry"
Specifies menu window geometry in widexhigh+xo+yo or similar form

.IP "\fB\-bd\fP buttondata"
Reserved for future option

.IP "\fB\-bw\fP widthcodes"
Use letters of widthcodes to control button widths

.IP "\fB\-bu\fP c1 c2 ..."
Creates row of buttons labeled c1, c2, ... that do commands c1, c2 ...

.IP "\fB\-bu\fP \fB\-la\fP l1 c1 \fB\-la\fP l2 c2 ..."
Creates row of  buttons labeled l1, l2, ... that do commands c1, c2 ...

.IP "\fB\-de\fP valpair"
(where valpair is of form name:value) changes program attribute
values.  See name lists in \fB\-de\fP section of OPTIONS.  Changeable values
include label and font colors, initial auto- vs click-mode button
settings, label scaling-factor, gtk resource file, verbose outputs,
and initial window properties such as Iconify, Stick, On-Top, and
Decorate.

.IP "\fB\-do\fP c1 c2 ..."
Creates do-groups (with editable command boxes) in two-line form, that
initially do commands c1, c2 ...

.IP "\fB\-dl\fP c1 c2 ..."
Creates do-groups in one-line form, that do commands c1, c2 ...

.IP "\fB\-ex\fP"
Creates an exit button in current row of buttons

.IP "\fB\-in\fP file"
Loads options from file

.IP "\fB\-iv\fP initialValue"
Set up a value-field (a button-plus-textbox unit) for a shell
variable, initialized with initialValue.  Typical \fB\-iv\fP sequences:

\h'+4n' \fB\-la\fP buttonLabel \fB\-la\fP shellVar \fB\-iv\fP initialValue

\h'+4n' \fB\-la\fP action \fB\-la\fP buttonLabel \fB\-la\fP shellVar \fB\-iv\fP initialValue

.IP "\fB\-la\fP txt"
Push a text string onto the label stack, to specify a text item such
as a button label, a variable name, or a shell command.  Yume3 applies
Pango markup to button labels but not to variable names or shell
commands.  Button label markup is described in the OPTIONS section of
this man page, under two headings: "Pango markup examples" in \fB\-de\fP
subsection, and "Button label text markup" in \fB\-la\fP subsection.

The next two examples show \fB\-la\fP as used to specify button labels,
variable names, and commands for the \fB\-iv\fP option.

.IP "\fB\-la\fP buttonLabel \fB\-la\fP shellVar \fB\-iv\fP initialValue"
Set up a value-field for shell variable shellVar, initialized with
string initialValue, and no-command button labeled buttonLabel.

.IP "\fB\-la\fP cmd \fB\-la\fP buttonLabel \fB\-la\fP shellVar \fB\-iv\fP initialValue"
Set up a value-field for shell variable shellVar, initialized with
string initialValue, and button labeled buttonLabel, for command cmd.

.IP "\fB\-ti\fP title"
Specifies window-name for the menu window

.IP "\fB\-Y\fP[\fBa|d|e|i|l|n|o|t|u|v|w|x\fP]"
Aliases for all the other options

.IP "\fB\-Y\fP<d>"
Set debug options.  Eg, if \fIS\fP is a set of yume options, the
command \fByume\ \-Y7\ \fP\fIS\fP\fB\ \-Y8\fP will display options as
yume processes them and builds a menu form, and will display commands
as they are executed.  Note, except for accepting larger numbers, 
\fB\-de\ ShowMode:\fPn is a synonym for \fB\-Y\fPn.

.SH DESCRIPTION, continued
.B yume
creates and runs a menu based on the arguments it's given.  Order of
arguments is significant; for example,
.ce
.B yume -bu date ls -ex &
creates a menu window with three buttons, labeled date, ls, exit (left
to right); while
.ce
.B yume -bu ls -ex date &
creates a menu window with three buttons, labeled ls, exit, date (left
to right).  For either of these examples, clicking a button
labeled 'date' runs the date command and displays the result in the
terminal window where yume started; clicking an ls button runs an ls
command for the directory current when yume started; and clicking an
exit button closes the menu window.

Created menus may consist of a mix of buttons, "do-items", and
"value-fields", created via \fB\-bu\fP, \fB\-ex\fP, \fB\-do\fP,
\fB\-dl\fP, and \fB\-iv\fP options.

A do-item is a unit with two buttons (labeled, by default, "EE" and
"do:") and a command-editing box.  If you click the do: button, the
command list in the editing box will be performed.  If you change the
text in the editing box, the new command will be performed the next
time you do: it.  A value-field is a unit with a command, a
shell-variable name, a label, and a text-editing box.  The text in the
box can be used elsewhere in the menu by shell-variable substitution,
as described below for the \fB\-iv\fP option.

For example,
.ce
.B yume -do 'ls -al' 'cal -3' &
creates a yume menu window with two do: items.  Clicking the do:
button of the top item runs the command "ls -al".  Clicking the other
do: button runs the command "cal -3".  Clicking the EE button of a do:
item will cause the label text of its EE button to turn red and the
do: button background to turn violet-blue to indicate that "entry
execution", or "auto-mode", or "rollover mode", call it what you will,
has been turned on.  (The colors mentioned are defaults; see next
paragraph.)  When you move the mouse onto an EE-enabled do: button,
its command list will be run immediately, with no click needed.  (If
you move the mouse cursor onto such a button and click it, the command
list will get executed twice -- once for the mouse entry, once for the
click.)

The violet-blue background mentioned above is used for all auto-mode
buttons if you are using the supplied yume-gtkrc file and haven't
changed default settings.  The \fB\-de\fP section below gives examples of
changing label colors and names, via Pango markup.  The file
examples/test-y-5 is a concrete example of label and color changes.

Command-editing text boxes for do: items may contain multiple
commands, pipes, etc, punctuated by semicolons or other shell
conventions.  For further explanation, see "[commands]" in the next
section.

Throughout this document, the term "parameter-required switch" refers
to any yume option-switch that requires a parameter string.
Parameter-required switches include \*[PRS].  If you don't provide a
parameter value word after such a switch, yume will treat whatever is
next as a parameter value-string anyway, or will quit with an error.
Example: 
.B yume -la D -bu date
will (correctly) make a button labeled D, with command date, while
.B yume -la -bu date
will make a do-group with command date.
Example:
.B yume -la
will display a missing-argument error.

.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\fB\-at\fP geometry"
Specify menu-window location and size, with a geometry string in the
usual X Window System form, with general form
.ce 1
 \fB\-at\fP WIDTHxHEIGHT+XOFF+YOFF
where each of the capitalized terms is a number of pixels; and XOFF,
YOFF can be positive or negative.  Some examples follow.
.ce 2
\fByume \-at 99x99-44-33 -ex\fP
\fByume \-ex \-at 99x99-44-33\fP
Either of those produces a 1-button box, labeled exit, near the lower
right corner of display.

If the parameters to yume do not include an \fB\-at\fP option, the
menu-window size will depend on sizes of labels and commands, and it
will be placed by window-manager rules.  In any case, the user can
move and resize the menu-window, after it appears, using ordinary
window-manager controls.  Note, yume treats "-geometry" as a synonym
for "\fB\-at\fP".  If a -geometry switch appears, yume converts it to \fB\-at\fP.

Yume does not validate geometry specifications.  It tests whether
gtk_window_parse_geometry() says the spec is valid; if not, it exits
with error YERR_GEOM.  However, a specification can be bad in spite of
being valid.  A user may give a valid specification that places the
menu apparently off-screen and perhaps inaccessible.  Yume tests for
this condition and may print a warning message if it occurs.

When multiple screens are in use, you might purposely set coordinates
exceeding screen size, to put a menu on a particular window.  You can
suppress, allow, or force the coordinates message via \fB\-de
XYshow\fP as explained below.

During startup, yume parses geometry, shows the menu, sets a
1/3-second timer, and enters its main event loop.  The window manager
places the menu and its buttons become active.  When the timer
expires, yume tests if any menu corner coordinate is negative or
exceeds screen size, and may print a message if enabled.  The message
is like "yume3 menu for pid %n appears at %x %y" (where %n, %x, %y are
filled in with pid# and menu corner coordinates).

You can control the coordinates message via \fB\-de\ XYshow\fP. By
default, XYshow is 1, to show menu corner coordinates only when a
coordinate is negative or exceeds screen size.  To suppress message,
use \fB\-de\ XYshow:0\fP.  To force message, use \fB\-de\ XYshow:2\fP.
XYshow can be abbreviated; eg: \fB\-de xys:2\fP
.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "\fB\-bd\fP buttondata"
This option is not implemented in current release of yume3.  It is
reserved for future use.  It will specify button options applicable to
subsequent buttons.

.ig
-----------------ignore following until \fB\-bd\fP implemented------------------
Each time a \fB\-bd\fP parameter is encountered, former values of
\fB\-bd\fP-controlled settings are cleared, and new values are set .

Options are specified by a string containing letters as listed below.
Letters of each pair have opposite effects; for example, f is the
opposite of g.
.RS
.IP "f,g"
Fixed or general; default is g, general.  A fixed command cannot be
changed by the user via right-clicking; a general command can be changed.
.IP "h,v"
Hidden or visible; default is v, visible.  A hidden command cannot be
seen by the user via right-clicking; a visible command can be seen.
.IP "m,n"
Mouseover allowed or not allowed; default is m, allowed.  m allows
the user to right-click a button and turn on rollover-execution for
buttons.
.RE
-----------------------end-ignore ------------------------
..

.IP \fB\-bu\fP
Select Button Mode and start a new row. 

Commands and switches following a \fB\-bu\fP (up until another \fB\-bu\fP or a \fB\-do\fP
appears) will form one row of the menu.  For each command after a \fB\-bu\fP,
yume will store the command while processing parameters; will compute
button sizes while preparing the menu; and will perform the command
when the menu is used.

The next three paragraphs expand upon the \fB\-bu\fP explanation just given,
and perhaps can be skipped on first reading.

While parameters are being processed: If the label stack is empty,
push the command onto it for use as a button label.  Get a label from
the label stack.  Make an items-list entry with the label and command
and data from earlier \fB\-de\fP and \fB\-bd\fP parameters.  If \fB\-Y2\fP or similar
has turned on ShoParProc, print out the command and some related data.

While menu is being prepared: Compute size of button, based on label
text length, or on a specified \fB\-bw\fP width code.  If \fB\-Y4\fP or similar has
turned on ShoAddObj, print out size of button for command.

While menu is being used: If \fB\-Y8\fP or similar has turned on ShoAssert,
print button data whenever it's clicked.  If \fB\-Y1\fP or similar has turned
on ShoWExp and the button action uses wordexp, report results of each
use.  Execute the command as described in "[commands]".
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "\fB\-bw\fP widthcodes"
Set button width ratios, forward from where the \fB\-bw\fP option appears,
until end of parameters or another \fB\-bw\fP occurs.  The k'th letter of
widthcodes specifies number of unit widths for the k'th button in a
row, left to right.  Unit width (in pixels) for each element of a row
is the menu's whole pixel width divided by the sum of relative widths
in a row.

Width codes are letters, a...z, that stand for 1...26 unit widths.
For example: "\fB\-bw\fP\ cd" says that in a row of two buttons, the
left button size will be given 3 unit widths, and the right, 4.  If a
row has more buttons than the widthcodes has letters, excess buttons
are treated not via letters but via a calculation.  For example, if
some rows after "\fB\-bw\fP\ cd" have more than two buttons, the
widths of buttons after the first two will be calculated per next
paragraph.  Note, one letter applies to one display element; so
\fB\-iv\fP groups use up two letters, and \fB\-dl\fP or \fB\-do\fP
groups use up three letters each.

Calculations: If no \fB\-bw\fP setting occurs among yume parameters, or if a
button number exceeds the \fB\-bw\fP widthcodes string length, yume will
compute button widths via sizes of the text strings that label the
buttons.  By default, a button is given one unit width for each 5
characters in its label.  (That is, buQuanta defaults to 5; see
examples mentioned in next paragraph.)

Examples: In the yume examples directory, see button-widths,
bw-and-quanta, example-starter3, and example-starter3.txt.  The first
of these creates three menus with "\fB\-bw\fP\ dc", "\fB\-de\fP\
buq:6", and "\fB\-bw\fP\ bbbb" to illustrate various \fB\-bw\fP and \fB\-de\fP\ buq
usages.

Note, \fB\-bw\fP processing does not check whether widthcodes are
lower case letters; it merely uses the low 5 bits of each character
it's given.  For ASCII characters, \fB\-bw\fP\ 43 has the same effect
as \fB\-bw\fP\ dc.  See e.g.  examples/calc-wrap2, which egregiously
creates eight menus, with \fB\-bw\fP settings identified in
menu-window title bars.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "[commands]"
Parameters that are not option switches (and not part of a
parameter-required switch, \*[PRS]) are stored as commands to be
performed when the user desires.  Yume has several switches that store
commands for user-controlled execution: \fB\-bu\fP, \fB\-dl\fP, \fB\-do\fP, and \fB\-iv\fP.
.RS
.IP \[bu]
In \fB\-bu\fP mode, the command is represented in the displayed menu by a
labeled button; the command will be performed when the user clicks the
button.
.IP \[bu]
In \fB\-dl\fP or \fB\-do\fP mode, the command is represented in the menu by a do:
item, as mentioned above.  It will be performed when the user clicks
the Do: button, or (if EE-enabled is on) when the user moves the mouse
onto the Do: button.
.IP \[bu]
The command for an \fB\-iv\fP option will be performed when the user clicks
the labeled button next to a value-edit-box in the displayed menu.  By
default, the command associated with an \fB\-iv\fP button is "true",
effectively a no-operation command.  To associate a real command with
an \fB\-iv\fP button, use the
.ce
.B  \fB\-la\fP shellCommand \fB\-la\fP buttonLabel \fB\-la\fP shellVar \fB\-iv\fP initialVal
format described in the \fB\-la\fP section.
.RE

In all modes, command lists are executed the same way.  Usually this
way is analogous to 
.ce
.B  execl("/bin/sh", "-c", "commandlist", 0)
in a forked copy of yume.  See 'COMMENTS: Commands' section for other
ways commands can be performed, which include %% or %# command echoing
for shell-command testing or debugging; %+ or %- non-forked; and %- or
%: non-SHELL.

Basically, command lists that don't begin with % are sent to a shell,
where they are treated much like ordinary shell commands.  Output from
command execution appears just as output from yume would appear; for
example, on the terminal window where yume was started.  If yume
output is redirected, so is command output, unless the executed
command list has redirection of its own.  For example,
.ce
.B  yume ./abc ./def \(dq./ghi > u\(dq > t &
directs output from programs abc and def to file t, and output from
program ghi to file u.  See examples/abc-def-ghi for a
slightly-extended version of this example; when you click the abc or
def buttons, output is fed to t, as you can see after the command
finishes, or while it is running by clicking the 'cat t to stderr'
button.  As stderr is not redirected, its output will appear on the
terminal where the example is started.

.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.ce
~~~
.IP "\fB\-de\fP valpair"
Decode valpair to override default attribute values.  For example, the
sequence
.ce
.B \fB\-de\fP nogtkrc \fB\-de\fP gtkrc:mygtkrcfile
tells yume to use gtkrc file
'B mygtkrcfile
and not use
'B $HOME/.yume3-gtkrc.

Each valpair must be a single argument to yume, so whitespace and
special characters must be quoted or escaped.  Within a valpair, any
non-alphanumeric character except underline can be used to separate
name and value.

Kinds of attributes and their associated names and purposes include
(1) label and font colors, (2) initial on/off-settings for auto- vs
click-mode button settings, (3) button locations, (4) label
scaling-factor, (4b) inclusion-limit, (5a) Gtk-parameters, (5) gtk
resource file, (6) verbose outputs, and (7) initial window properties
such as Iconify, Stick, On-Top, and Decorate.  In numbered subsections
(2)-(7) below, attributes are categorized, named, tagged, and
described in a format like following:
.ce
.B (subsection number) category: attribute-names ~[data-type]~ description. 
Data types include flags, numbers, and strings.
.RS
.IP (1)\ label-colors:
Label-color string names are listed in column 1 of the following
table.  The strings may contain Pango markup and are used as formats
for labels of buttons as noted in column 3.  [Caveat 1: Although Pango
markup worked ok on some Linux distributions at some point in the 201x
timeframe it apparently doesn't work on Ubuntu in the 202x timeframe.
Caveat 2: the fixed-command, general-command, and hidden-command
terminology for fa/fb, ga/gb, and ha/hb is intended for future
developments, which as of 2026 still haven't happened and perhaps
shouldn't be listed in table.  Instead see item (2), "initial
on/off-settings", which explains the ba, bb, da, db, ea, eb, ia, ib,
xa, xb flag settings.]

 	 1.		 2.		  3.
 	Name		Value	Purpose
 	y3db		"do:"	do: button, in button mode
 	y3da		"Do:"	do: button, in roll mode
 	y3eb		"EE"		EE button, button mode
 	y3ea		"EE"		EE button, roll mode
 	y3fb		"%s"		fixed-command button
 	y3fa		"%s"		fixed-command button, r.m.
 	y3gb		"%s"		general-command button
 	y3ga		"%s"		general-command button, r.m.
 	y3hb		"%s"		hidden-command button
 	y3ha		"%s"		hidden-command button, r.m.
 	y3ib		"%s"		iv group's button
 	y3ia		"%s"		iv group's button, r.m.
 	y3xb		"exit"	Exit button, button mode
 	y3xa		"exit"	Exit button, roll mode
 	y3td		""		do: group's text field
 	y3tv		""		iv group's text field

Column 2 shows initial format values for the several kinds of buttons.
User-supplied labels replace %s occurrences.  This same set of names
is used as style names in ~/.yume-gtkrc, which as supplied has a
single style for each button-mode/roll-mode pair except y3db/y3da.

The effect of a \fB\-de\fP label-color setting carries forward from the point
of definition.  If you want a set of colors to apply to all yume
menus, change settings via the ~/.yume-gtkrc file.  If you want to
change label font sizes for all or many yume menus, put appropriate
\fB\-de\fP label-color settings in file ~/.yume-rc or in an option file
included via \fB\-in\fP option.  Also see example test-y-5 and its
yume3-gtkrc-5C resource file.

.ce
\fBPango markup examples\fP

Example:  Create a menu with first button labeled "date" in ordinary
text, and other button "exit" in big bold text:
.ce 
.B yume \-bu date -de 'y3ex:<big><b>%s</b></big>'  -ex

Example: Create a menu with first button labeled "(Show date)", and
other button "Bye", both in usual text:
.ce
.B yume -de 'y3bg:(Show %s)' -bu date -la Bye -ex

Example: Create a menu where do: button for date command is labeled
"(((Do)))" whenever roll-over mode is on.  Note, yume starts out in
\fB\-do\fP mode, not \fB\-bu\fP mode; \fB\-ex\fP automatically turns on \fB\-bu\fP mode for
itself, so the first date command in this example is in a do: group
while the second one is on a \fB\-bu\fP button.
.ce
.B yume -de 'y3dr:(((Do)))' date -ex date

Example: Create a menu with two do: groups and a button labeled
"exit".  The second EE button's label text is green and it is labeled
Hey rather than EE.
.ce 2
.B yume 'ls -al' -de 'y3ee:<span color="green">Hey
.B </span>' 'cal -3' -ex

On many Linux systems, color constant values for use in Pango markup
are shown in file /usr/lib/X11/rgb.txt.  Hexadecimal forms like
#RRGGBB can also be used.
For Pango markup text-size and text-style constant values, see
<http://www.pygtk.org/docs/pygtk/pango-markup-language.html>.

.IP (2)\ initial\ on/off-settings:
\fBba, bb, da, db, ea, eb, ia, ib, xa, xb\fP ~[flags]~ If fname is a
flag name, the form \fB\-de\fP fname turns on its flag.  For each pair
of these flags, exactly one is on at a time.  (One of \fBba\fP and
\fBbb\fP, one of \fBda\fP and \fBdb\fP, and so forth.)

These ten flags control the initial auto-mode vs click-mode state of
yume's five kinds of buttons (-bu, do:, ee, -iv, -ex).  For example,
\fB\-bu\fP buttons created after \fB\-de ba\fP are created in
auto-mode and operate when the mouse enters the button.

Note, use \fB\-de ba\fP before a sequence of \fB\-bu\fP buttons to
turn on auto-mode (rollover mode) for those buttons, and if non-auto
buttons follow, say \fB\-de bb\fP to turn it off.

In the menus created by the following lines, the \fBls\fP buttons only
operate when clicked; the \fBdate\fP buttons operate whenever the mouse
crosses them or whenever clicked.  The first menu has an \fBExit\fP
button, and exits when mouse enters or clicks it.  The second menu has
an \fBexit\fP button and exits when it's clicked.  Note, \fB\-de xb\fP is
on by default; it's in second example only to make difference explicit.
.ce
.B yume -bu ls -de ba date -de xa -ex
.ce
.B yume -bu ls -de ba date -de xb -ex

If you use the supplied yume-gtkrc file as ~/.yume-gtkrc and haven't
changed default settings within that file, then buttons with auto-mode
enabled have a violet-blue normal background, pink prelight
background, and white lettering.  Click-mode buttons by default are
displayed with sky-blue backgrounds and black lettering. [Caveat: This
was the case in 201x timeframe but probably not in 202x due to Gtk changes]

A future version of yume may provide right-click dropdown menus to
change auto- vs click-mode states.  In current version, except for \fB\-do\fP
and \fB\-dl\fP do: buttons controlled by EE buttons, auto-mode vs click-mode
states are static during yume's execution.

.IP (3)\ button-locations:
attach ~[numbers]~ [Future]

.IP (4)\ label\ scaling-factor:
buQuanta ~[number]~ Set the number of label characters per "unit
width".  Default value is 5.  Consider the following four
examples. \fB
.RS
 \fP1.\fB   yume                   -bu 12345 12345678 123456789ABC
 \fP2.\fB   yume -bw aaa           -bu 12345 12345678 123456789ABC
 \fP3.\fB   yume         -de buq:4 -bu 12345 12345678 123456789ABC
 \fP4.\fB   yume -bw aaa -de buq:4 -bu 12345 12345678 123456789ABC

.RE
\fP
In example 1, the menu has a 1-unit-wide button, a 2-unit-wide button, and a
3-unit-wide button, because ceiling((letter count)/(quantum size)) is
1, 2, 3 for ratios 5/5, 8/5, and 12/5.

In examples 2 and 4, the menu has three 1-unit-wide buttons, because
\fB-bw\ aaa\fP says to use width 1 for buttons 1, 2, 3.  (Note that
\fB\-bw\fP options override \fBbuQuanta\fP calculations.)

In example 3, the menu has two 2-unit-wide buttons and a 3-unit-wide
button, because ceiling((letter count)/(quantum size)) is 2, 2, 3 for
ratios 5/4, 8/4, and 12/4.  If this menu appears 350 pixels wide
on-screen, then this row's unit width is 50 pixels.

Unit widths are calculated on a row-by-row basis.  For any given menu
width, a row with many buttons will have fewer pixels per unit width
than one with few buttons.
.
.IP (4b)\ inclusion-limit:
FStackLim ~[number]~ This number controls the number of levels of file
inclusion that yume allows.  It defaults to 400.  Yume reports an
error if inclusion depth exceeds the limit.  Such an error will occur
if an included file includes itself or an ancestor.
.
.IP (5a)\ Gtk-parameters:
gtk ~[string]~ The Gtk initialization routine gtk_init() can accept
command line parameters such as --gtk-module, --g-fatal-warnings, and
a few others.  \fB\-de\fP gtk:string gives parameters in string to
gtk_init(), after shell-globbing via wordexp().  For additional
information about gtk options, see the man page for gtk-options, and
see <http://library.gnome.org/devel/gtk/unstable/gtk-running.html>.
.
.IP (5)\ gtk-resource-file:
gtkrc ~[string]~ Use
.B -de gtkrc:\fIfilename\fP
to have yume use \fIfilename\fP as a GTK resource file.

nogtkrc ~[flag]~ Use
.B -de nogtkrc
to tell yume to not use
.B ~/.yume-gtkrc
as a  GTK resource file.  For example, the menus \fB
.RS
 \fP1.\fB   yume -ex
 \fP2.\fB   yume -ex -de nogtkrc
 \fP3.\fB   yume -ex -de gtkrc:file13
 \fP4.\fB   yume -ex -de gtkrc:file13 -de nogtkrc
.RE
\fP use Gtk resource files respectively as follows: (1) only
~/.yume-gtkrc, (2) none, (3) both ~/.yume-gtkrc and ./file13, (4)
only ./file13.  If you don't want ~/.yume-gtkrc to be used for any of
your yume menus, delete it.  If you have some resource file that you
want used for all of your yume menus, copy it over ~/.yume-gtkrc.
.
.IP (6)\ verbose-outputs:
ShowMode, XYshow  ~[number]~  ShowMode:n is a synonym for \fB\-Y\fPn but with
larger n allowed.  XYshow:n controls menu coordinates test and display
as described earlier in \fB\-at\fP section.
.
.IP (7)\ initial-window-properties:
wIconic, wOnTop, wStick, wUndec ~[flags]~ By default, a yume menu window
is created with Decorated turned on, and Iconic, Keep-Above, and Stick
properties turned off.  You can override those settings either
manually (typically by right-clicking in a yume menu's title bar), or
automatically, via the following parameter settings:

\fB\-de wIcon\fP will cause menu to be created iconified, rather than as an
open window.

\fB\-de wOnTop\fP will designate menu to stay on top of other windows.

\fB\-de wStick\fP will cause menu to be visible on all workspaces.

\fB\-de wUndec\fP will cause menu to be created without a
window-manager frame, as one might want for small menus where
decorations (such as title bar or window management bar) may be larger
than the menu itself.  Note, if you subsequently need to move or
resize an undecorated menu, use a window-manager menu.  Eg, on
metacity press alt-F7 and arrow keys; see
<http://library.gnome.org/users/gnome-access-guide/stable/keynav-14.html.en>.

.RE
Valpair forms that can appear as parameters for the -de option include
name; name:numbervalue; name:stringvalue; and name:multiple#values.
In each form, names can be abbreviated to any unambiguous shorter
form, and the case of letters in names is ignored.  For example, the
name buQuanta can be abbreviated as buQ, buq, buqu, buQua, etc.  Some
examples: \fB
.RS 22
 -de FStackLim:10
 -de gtkrc:mygtkrcfile
 -de buq:7
 -de buQuanta:7
 -de bOn
 -de attach:3,5,4,7

.RE
\fP
.
Concise lists of constants known to yume appear in yume3-trec.h, a
file that is created by program yume3-init when yume is built.

In yume2, recognized constant values for setting BuDef were BuFix,
BuHid, and BuVar, which are not recognized in yume3.

.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-dl\fP
Turn on \fB\-dl\fP mode for following commands.  That is, commands among the
following parameters will be put into \fB\-dl\fP items, until a \fB\-bu\fP, \fB\-do\fP,
\fB\-ex\fP, or \fB\-iv\fP appears.

Briefly, \fB\-dl\fP items are treated much like \fB\-do\fP items, except are
embedded within a button row, instead of taking two rows as \fB\-do\fP items
do.

That is, like each \fB\-do\fP item, each \fB\-dl\fP item has an EE button, a do:
button, and a command editing box.  Each \fB\-do\fP item is presented on two
rows of a menu; the upper row has an EE button and a do: button, while
the lower row has a command editing box.  By contrast, the elements of
a \fB\-dl\fP item are in line within a button row.  A button row can contain
any number of \fB\-dl\fP items.  In the sequence of commands after a \fB\-dl\fP,
other \fB\-dl\fP switches would be redundant.  For example, these are
equivalent:
.ce 2
 ... \fB\-dl\fP c1 \fB\-dl\fP c2 ...
 ... \fB\-dl\fP c1 c2     ...

After \fB\-do\fP, \fB\-dl\fP will start a new row in the menu; after
\fB\-bu\fP, it won't.  For example,
.ce 1
.B  yume -do -dl c1 -do -dl c2 -do c3 -bu -ex -dl c4
creates a menu with 5 rows; the first two are \fB\-dl\fP items for commands
c1 and c2, the third and fourth rows are a \fB\-do\fP item for command c3,
and the fifth row contains an exit button and a \fB\-dl\fP item for c4.
.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-do\fP
Start a new row in the menu and turn on do: mode for following
commands.  That is, commands among the parameters after \fB\-do\fP
will be put into do: items, until a \fB\-bu\fP, \fB\-dl\fP,
\fB\-ex\fP, or \fB\-iv\fP appears.  By default, yume is in do: mode
when it begins parameter parsing.

The general idea of the \fB\-do\fP switch is that commands and
switches following it, up until a \fB\-bu\fP, \fB\-dl\fP, \fB\-ex\fP,
or \fB\-iv\fP appears, will form do: entries in the menu.  A do: entry
occupies two rows of the menu layout; the upper row has an EE button
and a do: button, while the lower row has a command editing box.  In
the sequence of commands after a \fB\-do\fP before a \fB\-bu\fP,
\fB\-dl\fP, \fB\-ex\fP, or \fB\-iv\fP switch, other \fB\-do\fP
switches would be redundant.  Thus, all three of the following are
equivalent, and produce three do: items for commands c1, c2, c3, in a
menu with 6 rows:\fB
.ce 3
yume     c1     c2     c3
yume -do c1     c2     c3
yume -do c1 -do c2 -do c3
\fP
When you click do: (or move the mouse across an auto-mode Do: button),
the text in the editing box will be processed as a command.
.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-ex\fP
Creates an Exit button in button mode, labeled from top of label
stack.

In more detail, \fB\-ex\fP acts as follows: (1) If \fB\-do\fP mode is on, then turn
on \fB\-bu\fP mode and start a row of buttons. (2) If label stack is empty,
push "exit".  (3) In current row of buttons, pop label from stack and
create a labeled button, with exit-from-yume action.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "\fB\-in\fP file"
Process yume options from specified file.  The file contents should
look like an ordinary yume parameter list, except that line
continuations are optional in the file, and comments are allowed.  As
usual, if a line ends with backslash, then backslash and newline
characters are stripped; in other lines, a blank replaces newline.
Lines that begin with a number mark (#) are treated as comments and
ignored.  Expansion of unquoted variables in a file occurs when the
file is processed, in yume's runtime environment.

After all lines are read in and concatenated, the text is
shell-expanded with wordexp(3) and the result is processed as a yume
parameter list.  File-includes may be nested to depth given by
parameter FStackLim, with default value 400 (ie: \fB\-de FStackLim:400\fP).

If a user-options-file $HOME/.yume-rc exists, it is read at the outset
of parameter processing.  It is treated like any other included file,
except for having pride of place and being loaded automatically.

The button label stack can be set up with \fB\-la\fP parameters in an
include file and used by buttons generated after that file.  But an
include file cannot end with \*[PRS].  That is, if a parameter is
required for a switch in an include file, both the switch and its
parameter must be in that same file.

If your file includes shell-type expressions for file-globbing,
command substitution, or variable substitution, the following applies:
By its specification, wordexp(3) is allowed to fail to recognize some
shell special parameter expressions, such as $0, $#, and $*.  See
wordexp(3) and test any cases that are relevant on your own system.
Also see examples/wordexp-vals which uses "\fB\-in\fP wordexp-in" to test
the special parameter cases just mentioned.

During processing of an included file, the value of $0 will be not the
script name, but instead will be the path to yume3, because the
substitution will occur while yume is running, not beforehand.
Usually one can work around such issues in a script by setting
intermediate variables.

Use \fB\-Y1\fP, \fB\-Y2\fP, or other \fB\-Y\fP<d> options to see some
of the processed results of including a file.  See the "\fB\-Y\fP<d>"
section for details.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.
.IP "\fB\-la\fP buttonLabel \fB\-la\fP shellVar \fB\-iv\fP initialValue"
Set up a value-field for shell variable shellVar, initialized with
initialValue, and no-operation button labeled buttonLabel.  [The
command 'true' is used as a no-op, if no other command is specified.
That is, if the label stack has fewer than three entries when the -iv
option is processed, a 'true' command is attached to the command
button.]
.
.IP "\fB\-la\fP cmd \fB\-la\fP buttonLabel \fB\-la\fP shellVar \fB\-iv\fP initialValue"
Set up a value-field for shell variable shellVar, initialized with
initialValue, and a button labeled buttonLabel that performs command
cmd.
.
.IP "\fB\-iv\fP initialValue"
Set up a value-field, initialized with initialValue.  A value-field
has an optional command, a name, a label, and an editing box.  (The
command, name, and label are specified with \fB\-la\fP entries as noted just
above.)  The name is a shell-variable name that can be used elsewhere
in the menu to refer to the field's value.  The label is text that is
displayed on the label button.  If you click the button, the optional
command is executed.  The editing box is a small text-editing window
pane.  As you change text in the editing box, the value of the
variable changes in yume's environment as well.

\fBExample:\fP To construct a value-field entry for shell-variable HIPIX,
with label 'Screen Height, Pixels', and initial value of 1024, use:
.ce
.B -la 'Screen Height, Pixels' -la HIPIX -iv 1024.
To reference the contents of the value editing field elsewhere in the
menu, quote $HIPIX for substitution at command execution time.  Eg:  Use
.ce
.B -do "'echo ""Screen height is $HIPIX pixels""'"
(with outer single quotes and inner double quotes) and do not use
.ce
.B -do """echo 'Screen height is $HIPIX pixels'"""
(with outer double quotes and inner single quotes) which substitutes
for $HIPIX from startup environment rather than runtime environment.

If you click or operate the label button next to the edit-box, the
optional command will be executed, in the usual yume manner.  The
command, if given, is specified by a previous \fB\-la\fP parameter.  For
example, the one-line menu
.ce 2
.B yume -la 'echo Pay \[u005C]\[u0024]\[u0024]D to $B' -la Amt -la D -iv 20\(rs
.B      -de ia -la Who -la B -iv Sam
will have buttons labeled Amt and Who, and text fields initialized to
20 and Sam for shell variables D and B.  If you change the name in the
Who field to Sammi and then move the mouse across the Who button, that
button will operate because
.B -de ia
put it into auto-mode.  If you change the amount in the Amt field to
207 and click the Amt button, a message like "Pay $207 to Sammi" will
print.

If the options for a menu include several value-fields with the same
name, the last one specified gives the shell variable its initial
value.  That is, yume sets variables as it processes \fB\-iv\fP parameters;
if a variable belongs to several value-fields, it will be assigned
several times during yume initialization.

When you change the text in the edit-box, yume changes the shell
variable that belongs to the item, via setenv(name,value,1).  In yume2
only, if the value-field setup specifies an empty name, yume2 may use
putenv(value), intended to work with text in form "name=value" in the
edit-box.  Yume3 does not support that form.

Note, \fB\-iv\fP label order is different between yume2 and releases > 16 of
yume3.  yume3 accepts as the shell variable the latest label defined
before \fB\-iv\fP.

One more example:
.ce
.B -la 'svn help $H' -la 'Help Topic:' -la H -iv propget
in examples/svn-buttons uses the first 
.B -la
to specify a command 
.B 'svn help $H'
enclosed in single-quotes to avoid early shell substitution for H.  It
uses a second
.B -la
to specify the label "Help Topic:" for the button next to the
edit-box, and a third
.B -la
to specify shell variable H.  The edit-box is initialized to
\fBpropget\fP.  If you click the "Help Topic:" button when the menu
appears, the command "svn help propget" will be performed, causing
svn's help-text about propget to appear on the console where
examples/svn-buttons was started.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.
.IP "\fB\-la\fP txt"
Push text string txt onto the label stack.  Primarily, \fB\-la\fP is used to
specify button labels; it is also used to specify shell-variable-name
and shell-command text for \fB\-iv\fP, as mentioned above.  Note, to display
literal character '<' in a label, write '&lt;'.  See "Button label
text markup" below.

To create a line of buttons labeled b1, b2, b3, that execute commands
c1, c2, c3, use a sequence like the following:
.ce
.B "-bu -la b1 c1 -la b2 c2 -la b3 c3"

To create buttons as above but stacked in a column, use a sequence
as follows.  (Note additional \fB\-bu\fP switches.)
.ce
.B "-bu -la b1 c1 -bu -la b2 c2 -bu -la b3 c3"

.B Button label text markup --
Yume applies Pango markup to button label text.  You can use any UTF8
encoding and Pango Text Attribute Markup Language in button labels per
.ce
<http://library.gnome.org/devel/pango/stable/PangoMarkupFormat.html>.

Yume does not apply markup to other label text, such as shell-variable
names and commands for \fB\-iv\fP.

When characters in set { &, <, >, ", ' } are to appear verbatim in a
label, use escape sequences from set { &amp;, &lt;, &gt;, &quot;,
&apos; } for correct display.  Example: option sequence
.ce
.B ... \-la 'mycmd <clip>' mycmd ...
results in a blank label for the mycmd button and run-time error
message
.ce 2
Gtk-WARNING **:  Failed to set text from markup
due to error parsing markup: Unknown tag 'clip'
while by contrast,
.ce
.B ... \-la 'mycmd &lt;clip>' mycmd ...
gives a button labeled 'mycmd <clip>' for the mycmd button.

.B \-la Usage --
As noted above, 
.B -la txt
pushes a string value onto the label stack, from which values are
popped for use as labels, names, commands, and values.  When such an
item is needed, it's obtained from the stack.  If the stack is empty
when an item is needed, defaults are used.  Some examples:
.ce
.B yume -la ta-ta -la al date -bu 'ls -al' -ex
creates a menu with a do: item for command "date"; a button labeled
"al", for command "ls -al"; and a button labeled "ta-ta", for exit
from yume.
.ce
.B yume -la al date -bu -ex 'ls -al' -ex
creates a menu with a do: item for command "date"; a
button labeled "al", for exit from yume; a button labeled "ls -al",
for command "ls -al"; and a button labeled "Exit", for exit from yume.

If the stack is empty,
.ce
.B yume -la AA -iv report.t
creates a value-field for shell variable AA with initial value
"report.t", with a no-command button labeled "AA", while
.ce 2
.B yume -la 'date -r $FF' -la 'File to Date:'\(rs
.B -la FF -iv report.u
creates a value-field for shell variable FF with initial value
"report.u", and command 'date -r $FF' for the button labeled "File to
Date:".

Label-stack depth is limited by available memory and is not program
limited.  The label stack is freed up after parameter processing.
.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "\fB\-ti\fP title"
Set menu window title to specified title.  If yume is not given a \fB\-ti\fP
option, it sets the menu window title to "yume3  nnnnn" where nnnnn
is the process id number (pid#) assigned to yume3.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "\fB-Y\fP[adefghilnotuvwx]"
Each of the two-letter options \fB\-Ya\fP ... \fB\-Yx\fP indicated by
\fB-Y\fP[aefghinotuvwx] is synonymous with another yume option with
the same second letter.  For example, -Ya == -la, -Ye == -de, ... -Yx
== -ex.  When it starts, yume converts all of the 2-letter option
codes that it recognizes to -Y. form.  Note, this behavior is vestigial from yume2 and
\fIwill be removed\fP in a future release of yume3.  Yume also converts -geometry, if
present, to -Yt.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-Y\fP<d>
For this option, d is a digit 0...9.  The lower 4 bits of d control 4
parameter and command debugging functions; a function is turned on
when its bit is set, else is turned off.

If you just want to list parameters as they are processed, put -Y2 at
the beginning of the parameter list (or at the point where you want
parameter listing to begin).  If you just want to see commands as
buttons are clicked, put \fB\-Y8\fP near the end of the parameter list.

Briefly:
.RS
.IP \fB\-Y0\fP
Turn off parameter and command debugging.
.IP \fB\-Y1\fP
Use this to list the wordexp result array for %- or %:-prefaced
commands, or for \fB\-in\fP expansions.
.IP \fB\-Y2\fP
Use this to list parameters as they are processed, for example if you
are having problems with correct levels of quoting.
.IP \fB\-Y3\fP
Like \fB\-Y1\fP plus \fB\-Y2\fP
.IP \fB\-Y4\fP
Use this to list the objects of the menu form, for example if you want
to see actual sizes of menu elements.
.IP \fB\-Y5\fP
Like \fB\-Y1\fP plus \fB\-Y4\fP
.IP \fB\-Y6\fP
Like \fB\-Y2\fP plus \fB\-Y4\fP
.IP \fB\-Y7\fP
Like \fB\-Y1\fP plus \fB\-Y2\fP plus \fB\-Y4\fP
.IP \fB\-Y8\fP
Use this to print the executed command each time a button is clicked
or has a mouse event.  (Or use %% at beginning of command; see
"COMMENTS: Commands")
.IP \fB\-Y9\fP
Like \fB\-Y1\fP plus \fB\-Y8\fP
.RE

In more detail:
.RS
.IP "\fB\-Y1\fP, ShoWExp"
List the result array from wordexp expansion for
commands prefaced with %: or %-, or for \fB\-in\fP expansions.

.IP "\fB\-Y2\fP, ShoParProc"
List parameters as they are processed and show phase information.  For
example,
.ce
.B yume \-Y2 -bw ab -ex -la info xwininfo
prints a heading and lines like the following as it processes
parameters and completes yume startup phases:
          Item#   Par#   Par     Par
 ParProc    0.     2     <-Yw>   <ab>
 ParProc    0.     4     <-Yx>   <-Ya>
 ParProc    2.     5     <-Ya>   <info>
 ParProc    2.     7  <xwininfo> <(null)>
 Phase I (process parameters) is done
 Phase II (make display) is done

The first ParProc line represents the "\fB\-bw\fP ab" sequence; \fB\-bw\fP has been
converted to -Yw.  In other lines, -Yx means -ex and -Ya means -la.
The two numbers in each ParProc line are item number and parameter
number.  As -bw and -la each require a parameter, the parameter number
increases from 2 to 4 and from 5 to 7 when they are processed.  -ex
generated two items (see next example).  Note, -Y2 turns on Y2
parameter-processing printouts; -Y7 would turn on all of Y1, Y2, and
Y4 at the same time.  By contrast, "-Y1 -Y2 -Y4" would turn on -Y1,
then turn it off and turn on -Y2, then turn that off and turn on -Y4.

.IP "\fB\-Y4\fP, ShoAddObj"
List objects as they are added to form.  For example,
.ce
.B yume \-Y4 -bw ab -ex -la info xwininfo
prints a heading and three AddObj lines due to -Y4.  The first two
AddObj lines show the row-beginning RoList item and an Exitor item.
The third of these,
.ce
AddObj 2. BuGen ( 39 0 78 28) <info> <xwininfo>
shows that item 2 of the form is a general button with (x=39, y=0,
w=78, h=28), label="info", value="xwininfo".

.IP "-Y8, ShoAssert"
List objects when they are clicked on or have a mouse event.  For example,
.ce
.B yume -Y4 -bw ab -ex -la info xwininfo -Y8
prints the same 3 AddObj lines as the previous example, and prints a
line like the following when the "info" button is clicked:
.ce
AssertET 2. BuGen 39 0 78 30 <info> <xwininfo> L235
"L235" indicates that assertET() was called from line 235 of yume2.c

Note that when a do-group button is clicked, two AssertET lines will
print, one for the button and one for the edit-box.  Also note that
when Y8 is on, moving the mouse over a do: button will generate window
entry reports labeled <do:>.
.RE
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
See example scripts in the yume2/examples directory.  The examples
listed below are described in yume-examples(1).  The command
yume-examples starts a small menu to display a list of yume examples.
On the list of examples, "Code" and "Note" buttons appear next to the
names of some examples.  If you click a Code button, an xterm will
appear with source code of the example.  If you click a Note button,
an xterm will appear with a brief description of the example.
Pressing q in a Code or Note xterm will close it. The *.txt files in
yume2/examples contain Note text.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "lac - Latest-C script"
Make menu to edit / compile / make / run latest C program
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "lala - Latest-Latex script"
Make menu to edit / latex / pdf / view latest .tex file
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "yume-examples - A menu to start some yume examples"
Make menu to start menu to start example scripts, such as lac, lacc,
lacx, lala, find-ls-count, play-sound-delay, url-and-misc,
url-clip ...
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "COMMENTS: Regarding 'Commands'"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
As noted above, most command lists are executed in a shell, like shell
commands.  This is done via a C-statement like "execl("/bin/sh", "-c",
"commandlist", 0), which starts a shell via a forked copy of yume and
passes it a command list.  The first parameter (here, "/bin/sh") is
the value of environment variable SHELL (except when the command list
begins with a percent sign, as described later).

Use of $SHELL has several ramifications:
.RS
.IP \[bu]
SHELL should be defined in yume's environment.  If it isn't, yume
probably won't work.
.IP \[bu]
SHELL probably will be defined by your shell, such that menu commands
will act much the same way when yume runs them as when you type them
at a shell prompt.
.IP \[bu] 
If your shell doesn't support or allow -c, set SHELL to be the path to
a shell that does support -c.  Many UNIX shells, such as ash, bash,
csh, ksh, sh, tcsh, and zsh, use -c to specify a command to a shell.
.IP \[bu]
If you want to write a filter for menu commands to pass through, set
SHELL to the path to the filter, and make the filter accept -c for its
first parameter, and a raw command list for its second parameter.
.RE

A command list that starts with a percent sign (%) is handled
differently than described above; see next section for details.

.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "COMMENTS: Meta-mode 'Commands'"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------

A command list that starts with a percent sign (%) is processed in
"meta-mode", which allows one to control how commands are invoked, and
allows echoing commands for debugging.  Meta-mode is explained below.
For examples, please see files \fBdate-of-file\fP and
\fBdate-of-file.txt\fP in the \fBexamples/\fP subdirectory of yume
source.

In this section, "Command" stands for the shell command sequence of a
.B yume
menu button.  That is, "Command" is the action to be performed when an
associated button is clicked or activated.  If Command begins begins
as shown below left, it will act as shown below right.
.RS
.IP "\fB%%\fP"
Print command on stdout before it is executed
.IP "\fB%#\fP"
Print command on stdout, don't execute.
.IP "\fB%+\fP"
Execute command without forking. (Non-fork)
.IP "\fB%-\fP"
Execute command as-is, without forking. (Non-fork, non-SHELL)
.IP "\fB%:\fP"
Execute command as-is.  (Non-SHELL)
.RE

Fork, SHELL : The usual command-processing method that yume uses for a
non-meta Command is fork() to start a process to perform the command,
followed by execl() to start a shell that processes it.  That is, for
a Command not starting with %, Command is expanded via POSIX routine
wordexp() per usual shell globbing rules, after which yume forks and
uses execl($SHELL,"-c",...) to start a shell to process the expanded
parameter list.  ($SHELL represents a value from yume's environment,
like "/bin/sh", that indicates what shell to use.)

Non-fork, %+ and %- : When a meta-mode Command is executed without
forking, in essence yume exits before the Command is performed.  This
allows one to write menus with "popup"-like behavior.  For example:
.RS
.IP \[bu]
Menu A can have buttons that start menus B, C, ..., within which
Commands all start with %+ (non-fork) or %- (non-fork, non-SHELL).
Clicking a menu-A button starts (or pops-up) a secondary menu; when a
menu-B, menu-C, ... button is clicked, that menu goes away and the
button's associated command gets executed.
.IP \[bu]
%+ facilitates buttons for editing a menu script file and restarting
it, via formulas like:
     -bu -la 'Edit menu' "gedit $0" -la 'Reload menu' "%+$0"
.RE

Non-SHELL, %- and %: : When a meta-mode Command is executed non-SHELL,
it is expanded by wordexp as usual, but the first word after %- or %:
should be a program name.  yume will present the balance of the
Command list to that program, as its arguments.  Executing Command
non-SHELL reduces the number of exec() levels and number of processes
started by yume.  The Command may run a few microseconds faster and
take a few less bytes of memory vs. starting via shell.
.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DIAGNOSTICS, WARNINGS, CAVEATS
This section includes:
.RS
.IP "\[bu] yume's error messages and error exits;"
.IP "\[bu] how to deal with errors in shell commands in menus;"
.IP "\[bu] what environment is available to shell commands;"
.IP "\[bu] yume interaction with \fBscript\fP command;"
.IP "\[bu] visibility of parameter lists;"
.IP "\[bu] piping a parameter list into yume3;"
.IP "\[bu] safety and SUID and shell history lists."
.RE
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "\fByume's error messages and error exits:\fP"

Messages as listed below may appear on stderr if any of the following
errors occur.  This section shows symbolic names for the numbers that
will appear in actual error messages.  In revision 19, error names
ERR_EXECV, ERR_SEGV, ERR_FILE, ERR_MALLOC, ERR_MISSARG, ERR_GEOM,
ERR_WEXP, ERR_BADET, and ERR_DECODE correspond in that order to
numbers 10 through 18.  For current list, see typedef enum {...}
ErrorCode, near the beginning of yume-initA.h.

The yume error number is the numeric result returned to the shell if a
yume error occurs.  That is, for error number n, yume quits with
exit(n).  In each message, the phrase "at F:m L:n D:n" shows F, the
source-file name; L, the source-file line number where the error was
detected; and D, the current depth of file-inclusion.  Note, no
message appears for error ERR_EXECV.
.RS
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "*** Error ERR_EXECV, execv problem"
If a child process started by yume is unable to execv its command, it
uses _exit(ERR_EXECV) to terminate.  This has no effect on yume and
no messages are printed.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "*** Error ERR_MISSARG at F:m L:n D:n  Switch argument is missing for -Yx"
(where x is a letter and -Yx stands for \*[PRS]) An option switch that
needs a parameter was the last parameter in the parameter list or in
an included file.  For example,
.ce
.B yume -at
will cause a message like above.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "*** Error ERR_BADET at F:m L:n D:n  Expected entry type n but have type n"
(where n's are integers).  This message should never appear; if it
does, please report the input that caused it, and the yume version
number, by email to yume@pat7.com
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "*** Error ERR_FILE at F:m L:n D:n  Unable to open file X"
(where X is a filename with path and the n's are integers) appears if
a file specified in a -in option setting failed to open.  The path
should start from current directory or be absolute, and should name an
existing readable file, and any chain of includes should be of finite
depth.  For example, "yume -de FStackLim:567 -in in-test-7" (where
in-test-7 is a yume examples include file that includes itself) will
end with a message like "*** Error 12 at L:476 D:567 Unable to open
file in-test-7"
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "*** Error ERR_GEOM at F:m L:n D:n  Geometry code X not recognized"
(where X is a string).  This message will appear if, according to
gtk_window_parse_geometry(), the geometry parameter to -at is not in
proper X Window System form.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "*** Error ERR_WEXP at F:m L:n D:n  wordexp failure n"
(where n's are integers) appears if -in or %- or %: command
processing leads to a wordexp problem.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "*** Error ERR_DECODE at F:m L:n D:n  Lookup error in X"
(where X is a string).  This message will appear if a -de
string contains an unrecognized constant name.
.RE
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "\fBDealing with errors in shell commands:"

If your command list is wrong or malformed, you probably will see
error messages in the window where yume was started.  Some general
techniques for troubleshooting include:
.RS
.IP \[bu]
Try out the command at a shell prompt
.IP \[bu]
Add temporary echo commands to display command text, or preface the
command list with %% (to echo command list before execution) or %# (to
echo command list, but not execute it).  (See yume meta section above,
or see \fBexamples/date-of-file\fP and \fBexamples/date-of-file.txt\fP.)
.IP \[bu]
Or, add \fB\-Y4\fP to the parameter list.  See -Y<d> OPTIONS section.
.IP \[bu]
Add a temporary \fB\-do\fP group with the problematic command
.RE

But before you can use those techniques, you need to identify what
command has a problem.  Don't depend on line numbers.  For an example
of this, run examples/test-y-6; click the buttons, and note that
different lines of the menu, from different lines of the file, give
exactly the same two error messages, attributed to lines 0 and 1.

 /bin/bash: -c: line 0: unexpected EOF while looking for matching `''
 /bin/bash: -c: line 1: syntax error: unexpected end of file

Because the commands in test-y-6 are so simple, it is no problem to
figure out what is causing the problem there.  Just copy the text of
the command you clicked on, eg "echo 'Ok, let\'s check'", into a shell
prompt.  Then the error will be as obvious as it's going to get and
you can quickly resolve the problem.  Here, it is that between single
quotes, backslash is literal, ie, the first two quotes quote It\\,
leaving the third quote dangling.

If the problem is in the command behind a button, you can add a
temporary echo or %%, or a \fB\-do\fP group with the same command list, so it
is readily visible and possible to edit while testing.  Also, read
about shell quoting in various man pages; for example, see section
QUOTING in bash(1), and in xargs(1) see --null and --delimiter=delim
sections.  The --delimiter option in xargs allows you to specify an
alternative character to delimit parameters.

.\" << explain here more about -Y<d> command for debug use >>

.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "\fBEnvironment of menu commands:\fP"

In the usual UNIX scheme of things, parent and child have separate
environments; the child starts out with a copy of the parent's
environment, after which they go their own ways.  For example, suppose
process P creates child processes R, S.  R and S start out with their
own copies of P's environment.  After that, changes to the environment
in any one of the processes has no effect upon that of the other two.

yume's -iv value-fields allows you to change variables in yume's
environment while yume is running.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "\fByume and script interaction:\fP"

script(1) is a unix command to make a typescript of a terminal
session.  The sequence
.ce 2
script t
yume ...
will result in file t containing the output of any commands started
from the yume menu, along with other session activity, and that
output will also appear on the terminal.  (But t will not show the
yume-invoked commands themselves.)  On the other hand, the sequence
.ce 2
yume ...
script t
will result in file t not containing the output of commands started
from the yume menu, although that output will appear on the terminal
along with other session activity.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "\fBVisibility of parameter lists:\fP"

Historically, on multiuser unix systems parameter lists to processes
could be viewed by anyone who entered a ps -f command.  On most unix
systems that's no longer so; superuser access is required.

To minimize parameter visibility, yume is just a startup program that
runs briefly.  It hands parameters over to yume3 and then exits.
Parameters to yume usually are visible to ps only for a fraction of a
second.  If that is not good enough and the commands of your yume menu
should never be exposed to \fBps -f\fP, you can put the commands into
an access-protected file and use \fB-in\fP option.  With a little more
effort, it also is possible to put commands into an encrypted file,
and pipe directly from a decryptor program into yume3.

In more detail:  yume-pipr.c, running as 'yume', (1) accepts
parameters for yume3, (2) pipes them to yume3, and (3) exits, while
yume3 continues.  Both yume and yume3 must be executable and on your
search paths for this startup method to work.

.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "\fBPiping a parameter list into yume3:\fP"

All of the scripts in the examples/ directory invoke yume via a shell
variable called YUME.  With pre-2018.01.22 yume versions, yume3 read
parameters from stdin.  Thus one could make all the examples run yume3
(instead of yume) by cd'ing to examples and entering the following
command to run yume-examples:
.ce
.B YUME="yume3" ./yume-examples
or one could turn on -Y display options for any examples run by saying:
.ce
.B YUME="yume -Y4" ./yume-examples

With current versions of yume, yume3 is given a file descriptor to use
when reading parameters.  That FD is the sole parameter to yume3.
Also, yume3 now requires a parameter count and an upper bound on total
parameter size, given as the first two lines of input from the pipe.
The current set of examples does not cover direct input to yume3.
Here is a trivial example, where we suppose paramFile is a file of
less than 400 characters, containing 7 parameters to yume, and file
7400 has two lines, containing 7 and 400 respectively:
.ce
.B cat 7400 paramFile | yume3 0
Note, FD 0 (corresponding to stdin) tells yume3 to read stdin.

.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.IP "\fBSafety and SUID and shell history lists:\fP"

It is common advice to never use SUID shell scripts (that is, a script
one user can run with another's uid).  If, against this advice you
make a SUID script for a yume menu, it would be blatantly unsafe to
include any -do commands, and probably unsafe to have any -iv value
fields.  That is, limit the menu to buttons with fixed, hidden command
text.  This increases the difficulty of a user somehow getting shell
access.

If, for whatever reason, you decide to include -do or -iv items in
such a menu, then use chroot to limit file and command access, and use
history -c to limit its view of past shell commands.

.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.SH HISTORY
Development of yume3, the gtk-based version of yume, began in February
2011.  The xforms-based source file yume2.c was split up into yume3.c
and yume3-p[123].[ch], and xforms calls in yume3-p2.c and yume3-p2.c
were converted to Gtk calls.  Size calculations and property settings
are quite different in xforms and Gtk, so substantial changes were
made in  yume3.c and yume3-p1.c as well.

In February, 2009, yume2.c began as a translation of Tcl/Tk program
yume.tcl into C, using the xforms API.  yume2 was released on
SourceForge on 11 March 2009.  yume.tcl began as a program called
me-me in October, 1997.  In December, 1997 it was renamed to yume (a
Japanese word that translates to English as "dream"), and then
released for public use in 1998; for example, several early releases
appear(ed) at <http://yangtze.cs.uiuc.edu/~j-waldby/yume/> .

yume is not related in any way to yum(8), the Yellowdog Updater
Modified, nor is it related to Yume Linux (a 2005 SourceForge project,
to which virtual host yume.sourceforge.net is assigned), aside from
pre-dating both of them by most of a decade.

yume is a work in progress, and suggestions for improvement are
requested.  Please send useful example scripts and/or bug reports by
email to yume@pat7.com

.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.SH FILES

.I INSTALL
-- Not needed after yume is installed, this file explains how to install
yume and how to obtain libraries that yume uses to draw graphics
objects.  The INSTALL file distributed with yume2 explains how to
obtain xforms, while that distributed with yume3 explains how to
obtain Gtk.

.I ${yumedirectory}/examples/*
-- Two dozen examples of yume usage appear in the examples directory of
the yume distribution.  See yume-examples(1) for details.

.I $HOME/.yume-rc
-- An optional user configuration file for yume default values.  If this
file exists, it should be a text file containing yume option strings
to be treated in the same way as a \fB-in\fP file.

.I yume-rc
-- The yume3 distribution may include a file 
'I yume-rc
containing yume3 option settings.  If so, it lists all configurable
items, with default values in commented-out lines.  It can be used as
a prototype for creating your own
'I $HOME/.yume-rc.

.I $HOME/.yume-gtkrc
-- An optional user configuration file for Gtk settings.  If this file
exists, it should be a text file in Gtk resource-file format.
Distribution includes file
'I yume-gtkrc
(that is installed as 
'I $HOME/.yume-gtkrc
) that gives menus with colors as seen in the yume3-examples webpage,
eg-overview.html.  Other yume3-gtkrc5x files appear in the examples
directory and are used by example scripts and explained in .txt files
in that directory.

.I eg-overview.html
-- See webpages <http://yume2.sourceforge.net/examples/eg-overview.html>
and <http://yume3.sourceforge.net/examples/eg-overview.html> for
numerous examples of yume use.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP SHELL
yume uses the value of environment variable SHELL as the shell it
invokes to perform commands.

Please see section DIAGNOSTICS, WARNINGS, CAVEATS regarding the
environment available to the shell commands that yume runs.
.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.SH BUGS

\fB\-bd\fP option is not implemented and is reserved for future use.

\fB\-de\fP attach is accepted but not acted upon in this release.

\fB\-iv\fP label order is different in yume3 and yume2.  
 yume2:   \fB\-la\fP command \fB\-la\fP shellvarname \fB\-la\fP buttonlabel \fB\-iv\fP initialvalue
 yume3:   \fB\-la\fP command \fB\-la\fP buttonlabel \fB\-la\fP shellvarname \fB\-iv\fP initialvalue

This change to \fB\-iv\fP lets simple menus like 
.ce
.B yume \fB\-la\fP VVAR \fB\-iv\fP vvarInitialValue \fB\-bu\fP commandUsingVvar
be given without needing to separately specify a button label.  (The
\fB\-iv\fP button in this example is labeled VVAR.)  This change could
(but probably will not) be back-ported to yume2.

Hidden-command/general/fixed-command button types: In current release,
all \fB\-bu\fP buttons are "hidden-command" buttons such that command
associated with a button cannot be displayed by menu user.  A future
release may have a right-click popup command view for fixed buttons,
or view-and-modify for general buttons.  That popup also will allow
changing click-mode vs. auto-mode (roll-over) state of various
buttons.  At present, auto- vs click-mode is controlled by \fB\-de\fP
options.

Before Release 19, changes in \fB\-iv\fP text boxes did not update
environment text unless Enter was pressed or button clicked.  This
problem was resolved by use of signal "changed" instead of "activate"
for CB_TextEntry's InitVal case so that the yume runtime environment
changes whenever the text in the \fB\-iv\fP text box changes.

Item 2 in Section 12.1 ("Utility Argument Syntax") of IEEE Std
1003.1-2008 Open Group Base Specifications Issue 7 states that "a
conforming application shall use separate arguments for that option
and its option-argument. However, a conforming implementation shall
also permit applications to specify the option and option-argument in
the same argument string without intervening <blank> characters."
Yume does not provide the latter capability but instead always
requires separate arguments for option and option-argument.

.\"------------------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
 James Waldby <j-waldby at pat7 dot com>
 Send suggestions and/or bug notes to:  yume@pat7.com
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR yume-examples(1)
.\", yume-meta(1)

.ig
-----------------------begin-ignore------------------------
---------------------end-ignore-----------------------------
..
